Describe DP goals and threat model (#17)
wangshan/draft-wang-ppm-differential-privacy: draft-wang-ppm-differential-privacy.md

mechanisms that endow them with this property. All such mechanisms work by
introducing "noise" into the computation that is carefully calibrated for a
number of application-specific parameters, including the structure and number
of measurements, the desired aggregation function, and the degree of "utility"
required. Intuitively, a high degree of privacy can be achieved by adding a lot

> of noise; but adding too much noise can reduce the veracity of the aggregate

Reviewer: veracity is not really relevant; usefulness might be

```suggestion
of noise; but adding too much noise can reduce the usefulness of the aggregate
```

In this document, we shall refer to the composition of DP mechanisms into a
scheme that provides (some notion of) DP as a "DP policy". For some policies,
noise is added only by the Clients or only by the Aggregators, but for others,
noise might be added by both Clients and Aggregators. The best choice of policy

> depends one's "trust model": if most Clients can be trusted to noise their

Reviewer: scare quotes?

Author: What do you mean by square quotes?

Reviewer 2: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scare_quotes

There seems to be no reason for quotes here.
And there is an "on" missing: `The best choice of policy depends *on* one's trust model`

Author: I'm using quotes to emphasize a term I'm defining. If this were latex, I'd use `\emph{}`. Markdown italics can't be used in RFCs as far as I know.

measurements correctly, then a high degree of privacy can be achieved with

> minimal loss in utility; but if most Clients are corrupted by the attacker,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
minimal loss in utility; but if the trust model includes the possibility that many Clients are corrupted by the attacker,
```

> minimal loss in utility; but if the trust model includes the possibility that many Clients are corrupted by the attacker,

Reviewer 3: nit: wrap at 80 columns.

> then the same degree of privacy can only be achieved at the cost of higher

Reviewer 2: nit: "at the cost of some utility" because "higher" is weird here since the utility is getting lower.

Author: Good catch, I meant "decreased" 😬

> only be achieved at the cost of decreased utility.

Reviewer 4: To me this section indicates one must define the trust model of their deployment then choose DP policy. But in reality the trust model may not hold true all the time. It may not be possible for user to choose a trust model and that model's best policy. For e.g. one may not know how many clients are honest. In reality, user probably will choose a DP policy then analyse/explain their DP guarantee under different trust model. Maybe we can word this to something like the choice of DP policy will be affected by the trust model, etc. @cjpatton

Author: Great idea! I pruned some of the text here and implemented your suggestion in the itemized list below, PTAL.

The primary goal of this document is to specify how DP policies are implemented
in DAP. It does so in the following stages:

1. {{overview}} describes the notion(s) of DP that are compatible with DAP and

>    the trust model(s) in which we hope to achieve them. It also provides a

Reviewer 2: nit: Just say "trustmodels" the distinction doesn't matter here

This document uses the same conventions for error handling as {{!DAP}}.

> Let `exp(EPSILON)` denote raising the numeric constant `e` to the power of

Reviewer: Did you know that you can do this now:

```suggestion
Let `exp(ε)` denote raising the numeric constant `e` to the power of
```

Of course, whether you want to or not is something you will need to decide.

Author: What would the RFC editor make of this? It's massively preferable obviously, but I don't know if this would eventually get shot down.

Reviewer: Well, they recently changed the tooling because the tooling was too strict.  This would be fine.

Author: It looks like it only renders in "art mode": 
![image](https://github.com/wangshan/draft-wang-ppm-differential-privacy/assets/3453007/070f9a8e-7fa9-46dc-a505-1cbbed32f6f2)

Reviewer: srsly?  That's an xml2rfc bug if ever I saw one.  `&#120656;`= &#120656; works fine in browsers, so something is double-quoting the ampersand.

Reviewer: FWIW, my local testing doesn't produce that bug.  I had no trouble getting an epsilon to show, either by pasting the character directly in the document source or by using an entity reference.

Author: Ack, I'll do some research at some point. Possibly I have an old version.

`EPSILON`.

# Security Goals and Trust Model {#overview}

## Differential Privacy

DP formalizes a property of any randomized algorithm that takes in a sequence
of measurements, aggregates them, and outputs an aggregate result. Intuitively,
this property guarantees that no single measurement signficantly impacts the
value of the aggregate result. This intuition is formalized by {{DMNS06}} as
follows.

> CP: The following is might be too jargony for an informative RFC, but for now
> I think we're all just trying to agree on the definition. Once we have
> consensus among ourselves, we can punt this to the appendix and leave a less
> formal description here.

[CP: This is substitution+pure-DP: Is {{DMNS06}} the right reference?] We say
that two sequences of measurements `D1` and `D2` are "neighboring" if they are
the same length and contain all the same measurements except one (i.e., the
difference between their multisets contains one element).

Let `p(S, D, R)` denote the probability that randomized algorithm `S`, on input
of measurements `D`, outputs aggregate result `R`.

> A randomized algorithm `R` is called "`EPSILON`-DP" if for all neighboring `D1`

Reviewer 2: R and S are mixed up. Above it says S is the algorithm and R the aggregate, now this changes.

Author: Good catch. Previously I was using `R` for the algorithm and missed this one.

and `D2` and all possible aggregate results `S`, the following inequality
holds:

~~~
p(S, D1, R) <= exp(EPSILON) * p(S, D2, R)
~~~

In other words, the probability that neighboring inputs produce a given
aggregate result differs by at most a constant factor, `exp(EPSILON)`.

One can think of `EPSILON` as a measure of how much information about the
measurements is leaked by the aggregate result: the smaller the `EPSILON`, the
less information is leaked by `S`. For many DP mechanisms, it is possible to
make `EPSILON` so close to `0` that the difference between `p(S, D1, R)` and
`p(S, D2, R)` is negligible. However, this requires adding more noise, which
has an adverse impact on utility. Most applications will accept a

> non-negligible bound in order achieve reasonable utility. See {{dp-explainer}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
non-negligible bound in order to achieve reasonable utility. See {{dp-explainer}}
```

properties, but are not pure-DP. See {{mechanisms}} for details.

Other variants of DP are possible; see the literature review in
{{dp-explainer}} for details.

## Trust Models

When considering whether a given DP policy is sufficient for DAP, it is not
enough to consider the mechanisms used in isolation. It is also necessary to
consider the process by which the policy is executed. In particular, our threat
model for DAP considers an attacker that participates in the upload,
aggregation, and collection protocols and may use its resources to attack the
underlying primitives (VDAF {{!VDAF}}, HPKE {{!RFC9180}}, and the transport
security protocol).

To account for such attackers, our goal for DAP is "computational-DP" as
described by {{MPRV09}}, which formalizes the amount of information an active
attacker can glean about the measurements over the course of its attack on the
protocol. We consider an attacker that controls the network and statically
corrupts a subset of the parties.

We say the protocol is pure-DP (resp. approximate-DP) if the view of any
computationally bounded attacker can be efficiently simulated by a simulator

> `S` that itself is pure-DP (i.e., apprixmate-DP) as defined above. (`S` takes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`S` that itself is pure-DP (or, approximate-DP) as defined above. (`S` takes
```

> `S` that itself is pure-DP (i.e., apprixmate-DP) as defined above. (`S` takes

Reviewer 2: nit: It's better to drop the parentheses the explanation is totally justified here. And maybe pick something other than `S` because that was already used above. If it's not used further it could just be omitted.

the measurements as input and outputs a value that is computationally
indistinguishable from the transcript of the protocol's execution in the
presence of the attacker.)

Whether this property holds for a given DP policy depends on which parties can

> be trusted to execute the prtocol correctly (i.e., which parties were not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be trusted to execute the protocol correctly (i.e., which parties were not
```

corrupted by the attacker). The DP policies described in this document are
secure in one of two trust models described below.

### OAMC: One-Aggregator-most-Clients

Assume that most Clients and one Aggregator is honest. The other
Aggregator and the Collector are controlled by the atacker. The degree of
privacy provided by the DP policy (i.e., `EPSILON`) degrades as the number of
honest Clients decreases.

> ### COA: Collector-one-Aggregator
> 
> Assume that the Collector and one Aggregator is honest. In particular,
> assume the Collector does not reveal the aggregate result to the honest
> Aggregator. The other Aggregator and most Clients are controlled by the
> attacker.

Author: Simpler alternative suggested by Kunal. This doesn't account for the attack in #15, which is that one Aggregator "maliciously" doesn't add noise, causing its co-Aggregator to learn the non-noised aggregate result. I don't really know what to make of this "attack". I'd be fine ignoring it if folks think that splitting hairs here is distracting.

```suggestion
### OA: One-Aggregator

Assume that at least one Aggregator is honest. The other Aggregator(s), the Collector, and most Clients are controlled by the attacker.
```

Reviewer 2: I think `One-Aggregator` is strictly more powerful and aligns better with the fact that there is no requirement in DAP to keep aggregates secret.

I agree with the statements in issue #15 that assuming one aggregator doesn't add noise and the other one removes their own noise is actually two malicious aggregators and violates assumptions.

Author: Done. I left addressing issue #15 as a TODO: It's worth mentioning in Security Considerations at least.

> ### COA: Collector-one-Aggregator
> 
> Assume that the Collector and at least one Aggregator is honest. In particular,
> assume the Collector does not reveal the aggregate result to the honest
> Aggregator. The other Aggregator and most Clients are controlled by the
> attacker.

Author: Simpler alternative suggested by Kunal. This doesn't account for the attack in #15, which is that one Aggregator "maliciously" doesn't add noise, causing its co-Aggregator to learn the non-noised aggregate result. I don't really know what to make of this "attack". I'd be fine ignoring it if folks think that splitting hairs here is distracting.

```suggestion
### OA: One-Aggregator

Assume that at least one Aggregator is honest. The other Aggregator(s), the Collector, and most Clients are controlled by the attacker.
```

## Hedging

If a trust model's assumptions turn out to be false in practice, then it is
desirable for a DP policy to maintain security in a different trust model. For
example, a deployment of DAP might be to provide some mechanism (e.g., a
Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)) to ensure that most, if not all, reports
that are consumed were generated by trusted Clients, thereby achieving OAMC
security. But if this mechanism is broken (e.g., a flaw is found in the TEE),
then it is desirable if the DP strategy is at least COA-secure.

If no parties are honest, then the best we can hope for is that the honest
Clients' measurements have "local-DP". This property is defined the same way as
pure- or approximate-DP, except that the bound we aim to achieve is much looser
than usual. For example, if the parameters of a DP policy are tuned for OAMC
security, but both Aggregators are corrupted by the attacker, then the noise

> added by the Client may not be sufficient to protect the measurement. Howver

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
added by the Client may not be sufficient to protect the measurement. However
```

This document uses the same conventions for error handling as {{!DAP}}.

Let `exp(EPSILON)` denote raising the numeric constant `e` to the power of
`EPSILON`.

> # Security Goals and Trust Model {#overview}

Reviewer 3: Correct me if I'm wrong: I believe the goal of this section is to provide an overview of DP, including definitions (done in this PR), trust models (done in this PR), utility (to be filled) etc. Should the title of this section be changed to something like "Overview" as well? And things like utility can be added as a subsection in the overview.

Author: I moved things around a bit. I guess we should have reviewed this first ... I took the liberty to just push to main. The old "DP overview" section is now in the Appendix.

Reviewer 4: I think we can bring back some section from old overview once we merge this. For e.g. local-DP should be explained before it's mentioned in Hedging

Author: That could work. I was thinking of adding a new section to Trust Models, something like this:

```
## NOP: No-honest-parties

If no parties are honest, then the best we can hope for is that the honest
Clients' measurements have "local-DP". This property is defined the same way as
pure- or approximate-DP, except that the bound that we aim to achieve is looser
than what we can get when at least one Aggregator is honest (OAMC or OA).
```

Reviewer 4: sounds good to me, maybe worth mentioning there is still at least one honest client worthy protecting for.

Author: Done.

## Differential Privacy

DP formalizes a property of any randomized algorithm that takes in a sequence
of measurements, aggregates them, and outputs an aggregate result. Intuitively,
this property guarantees that no single measurement signficantly impacts the
value of the aggregate result. This intuition is formalized by {{DMNS06}} as
follows.

> CP: The following is might be too jargony for an informative RFC, but for now
> I think we're all just trying to agree on the definition. Once we have
> consensus among ourselves, we can punt this to the appendix and leave a less
> formal description here.

[CP: This is substitution+pure-DP: Is {{DMNS06}} the right reference?] We say
that two sequences of measurements `D1` and `D2` are "neighboring" if they are
the same length and contain all the same measurements except one (i.e., the

> difference between their multisets contains one element).

Reviewer 5: Yes, {{DMNS06}} is defining Substitution + Pure DP in Def 1 (the "databases" have the same length). But with this definition, the *symmetric difference* between the multisets actually contains 2 elements, not one element.

Another reference that I often see to explain the difference between Substitution-DP and Addition-DP is this SIGMOD '11 paper: https://www.cse.psu.edu/~duk17/papers/nflprivacy.pdf. I think that they introduced the Bounded/Unbounded DP terminology, which is used by some papers.

Author: Great catch! Added reference to the Appendix (and cleaned up the subsection).

When considering whether a given DP policy is sufficient for DAP, it is not
enough to consider the mechanisms used in isolation. It is also necessary to
consider the process by which the policy is executed. In particular, our threat
model for DAP considers an attacker that participates in the upload,
aggregation, and collection protocols and may use its resources to attack the
underlying primitives (VDAF {{!VDAF}}, HPKE {{!RFC9180}}, and the transport
security protocol).

To account for such attackers, our goal for DAP is "computational-DP" as
described by {{MPRV09}}, which formalizes the amount of information an active
attacker can glean about the measurements over the course of its attack on the
protocol. We consider an attacker that controls the network and statically
corrupts a subset of the parties.

We say the protocol is pure-DP (resp. approximate-DP) if the view of any
computationally bounded attacker can be efficiently simulated by a simulator
that itself is pure-DP (or approximate-DP) as defined above. (The simulator
takes the measurements as input and outputs a value that is computationally
indistinguishable from the transcript of the protocol's execution in the

> presence of the attacker.)

Reviewer 5: This corresponds to the SIM-CDP definition (Def 4 from {{MPRV09}}). Other definitions exist, such as IND-CDP or SIM+-CDP, so it can be worth stating the exact definition being used once we have the formal CDP proof.

Author: Added this reference.

Whether this property holds for a given DP policy depends on which parties can
be trusted to execute the protocol correctly (i.e., which parties were not
corrupted by the attacker). The DP policies described in this document are
secure in one of two trust models described below.

### OAMC: One-Aggregator-most-Clients

Assume that most Clients and one Aggregator is honest. The other
Aggregator and the Collector are controlled by the atacker. The degree of
privacy provided by the DP policy (i.e., `EPSILON`) degrades as the number of
honest Clients decreases.

### OA: One-Aggregator

> Assume that at least one Aggregator is honest. The other Aggregator(s), the

Reviewer 4: perhaps enough to just say Aggregator, without (s), as other parts of the PR does

Author: yes, good catch!

Collector, and most Clients are controlled by the attacker.

> 

Reviewer 5: Should it be "all Clients" instead of "most Clients", since we only trust one Aggregator and nobody else?

Author: @wangshan pointed out that we're considering at least one honest Client, since otherwise privacy is completely meaningless :D

Reviewer 5: I see, although I'd say that in that case privacy is trivially true rather than meaningless ("for all neighboring databases in \emptyset, ..."). 

But if we want to consider at least one honest Client, then we could make it explicit in the trust model, and say "all but one Client" instead of "most Clients". The separation between OneAggregator-MostClients and OneAggregator-OneClient seems cleaner than between OneAggregator-MostClients and OneAggregator-FewClients.

Author: Well, ideally what we want is that that DP bound we can prove depends on the number of honest Clients: if all clients are honest then we get a great bound; if most are malicious, then we still the remaining Clients still get some degree of protection.

Reviewer 5: That makes sense, if we have a bound that degrades gracefully when the number of honest Clients decreases, then OneAggregator-OneClient is simply a special case of this more general bound. But can't we capture this graceful degradation directly in the OA-MC trust model?

Two things still bug me a little with the current definition of OA, which is really OneAggregator-FewClients.
- For a simple policy like Aggregator-side noise, the bound does not even depend on the number of honest Clients. So aggregator-side noise is secure under OneAggregator-OneClient. It seems wasteful to request stronger (and possibly more vague) trust assumptions in the form of OneAggregator-FewClients, when we really only need OneAggregator-OneClient.
- Currently, the separation between OA and OA-MC seems a bit blurry: when do we go from "most Clients are honest" (OA-MC) to "most Clients are malicious" (OA)? Do we have protocols that drastically change when we go from 51% honest to 49% honest? I'd expect this kind of separation (maybe with a 2/3 threshold instead of 1/2) when we do MPC, but I don't think we're considering these protocols for now.

Author: >     * For a simple policy like Aggregator-side noise, the bound does not even depend on the number of honest Clients. So aggregator-side noise is secure under OneAggregator-OneClient. It seems wasteful to request stronger (and possibly more vague) trust assumptions in the form of OneAggregator-FewClients, when we really only need OneAggregator-OneClient.

I agree that this distinction doesn't matter. However the distinction between OA-OC and OA-MC is important because, if you're targeting OA-MC, but it turns out that you're in OA-OC, then you may not have any privacy at all, say, if you're doing Client-only noise. On the other hand, if you're targeting OA-OC and use Aggregator-only noise, then you may end up with more utility loss than had you targeted OA-MC.

I've changed "OA" to "OAOC" as you suggest.

>     * Currently, the separation between OA and OA-MC seems a bit blurry: when do we go from "most Clients are honest" (OA-MC) to "most Clients are malicious" (OA)? Do we have protocols that drastically change when we go from 51% honest to 49% honest? I'd expect this kind of separation (maybe with a 2/3 threshold instead of 1/2) when we do MPC, but I don't think we're considering these protocols for now.

We are considering protocols like DPrio, where the privacy degrades as the number of corrupt clients increases. We're also considering pure Client-noise, which should similarly degrade gracefully. I don't expect we'll have schemes where the DP bound suddenly plummets once one more Client starts cheating!

Reviewer 5: Great, thanks @cjpatton!

> > TODO(issue#15) For the simple Aggregator-noise mechanism, if the malicious

Reviewer 4: question: @cjpatton am I right the two trust model are type 1 and 2 from the googledoc. we don't consider the case where one aggregator and collector are honest? do we want to include this happy case?

Author: See https://github.com/wangshan/draft-wang-ppm-differential-privacy/pull/17#discussion_r1329407535. It seems like people mostly agree that the attack #15 is basically the same as two Aggregators colluding. I'm not totally convinced myself (I wonder what happens when we try to formalize our security definition and try to prove it), but I think this is fine for now.

In any case, it's useful to settle on as few possible trust models as possible.

{{!RFC8446}}).

To account for such attackers, our goal for DAP is "computational-DP" as
described by {{MPRV09}} (Definition 4, "SIM-CDP"). This formalizes the amount
of information a computationally bounded attacker can glean about the
measurements over the course of its attack on the protocol. We consider an
attacker that controls the network and statically corrupts a subset of the
parties.

We say the protocol is pure-DP (resp. approximate-DP) if the view of any
computationally bounded attacker can be efficiently simulated by a simulator
that itself is pure-DP (or approximate-DP) as defined above. (The simulator
takes the measurements as input and outputs a value that is computationally
indistinguishable from the transcript of the protocol's execution in the
presence of the attacker.)

Whether this property holds for a given DP policy depends on which parties can
be trusted to execute the protocol correctly (i.e., which parties were not
corrupted by the attacker). We consider three, increasingly pessimistic trust
models.

### OAMC: One-Aggregator-most-Clients

Assume that most Clients and one Aggregator is honest and that the other

> Aggregator and the Collector are controlled by the atacker. This corresponds to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Aggregator and the Collector are controlled by the attacker. This corresponds to
```

This document uses the same conventions for error handling as {{!DAP}}.

Let `exp(EPSILON)` denote raising the numeric constant `e` to the power of
`EPSILON`.

# Security Goals and Trust Model {#overview}

## Differential Privacy

DP formalizes a property of any randomized algorithm that takes in a sequence
of measurements, aggregates them, and outputs an aggregate result. Intuitively,
this property guarantees that no single measurement signficantly impacts the
value of the aggregate result. This intuition is formalized by {{DMNS06}} as
follows.

> CP: The following is might be too jargony for an informative RFC, but for now
> I think we're all just trying to agree on the definition. Once we have
> consensus among ourselves, we can punt this to the appendix and leave a less
> formal description here.

We say that two batches of measurements `D1` and `D2` are "neighboring" if they
are the same length and contain all the same measurements except one (i.e., the
symmetric difference between the multisets contains two elements).

Let `p(S, D, R)` denote the probability that randomized algorithm `S`, on input

> of measurements `D`, outputs aggregate result `R`.

Reviewer 3: The rest of the document seems to call the randomized algorithm as `R`, and aggregate result as `S`.

Reviewer 3: also one nit thing: I don't know if you intend to use a mixture of "randomized algorithm" and "DP mechanism", but they seem to mean the same to me.

Author: * Arg... I meant to use `S` for the algorithm and `r` for the aggregate result. Fixed now (hopefully).
* They're slightly different because the "DP mechanism" just generates noise; the "randomized algorithm" here aggregates then invokes a DP mechanism.

model for DAP considers an attacker that participates in the upload,
aggregation, and collection protocols and may use its resources to attack the
underlying cryptographic primitives (VDAF {{!VDAF}}, HPKE {{!RFC9180}}, and TLS
{{!RFC8446}}).

To account for such attackers, our goal for DAP is "computational-DP" as
described by {{MPRV09}} (Definition 4, "SIM-CDP"). This formalizes the amount
of information a computationally bounded attacker can glean about the
measurements generated by honest Clients over the course of its attack on the
protocol. We consider an attacker that controls the network and statically
corrupts a subset of the parties.

We say the protocol is pure-DP (resp. approximate-DP) if the view of any
computationally bounded attacker can be efficiently simulated by a simulator
that itself is pure-DP (or approximate-DP) as defined above. (The simulator
takes the measurements as input and outputs a value that is computationally
indistinguishable from the transcript of the protocol's execution in the
presence of the attacker.)

Whether this property holds for a given DP policy depends on which parties can

> be trusted to execute the protocol correctly (i.e., which parties were not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be trusted to execute the protocol correctly (i.e., which parties are not
```

?

Whether this property holds for a given DP policy depends on which parties can
be trusted to execute the protocol correctly (i.e., which parties were not
corrupted by the attacker). We consider three, increasingly pessimistic trust
models.

### OAMC: One-Aggregator-most-Clients

Assume that most Clients and one Aggregator is honest and that the other
Aggregator and the Collector are controlled by the atacker. This corresponds to
the same trust model as the base DAP procotol. Ideally, the degree of privacy
provided (i.e., the value of `EPSILON` for pure-DP) degrades gracefully as the

> number of honest Clients decreases.

Reviewer 5: Does OAMC really correspond to the DAP trust model? I think that OA corresponds better, and I think that @simon-friedberger made the same point here: https://github.com/wangshan/draft-wang-ppm-differential-privacy/pull/17#discussion_r1329844060. 

If I understand correctly, DAP only says "Individual users can reveal their own measurement and compromise their own privacy." and doesn't limit the number of Clients who do so.

Author: The base protocol is meant to provide private aggregation (the attacker learns nothing but the aggregate result) up to Sybil attacks. That means the protocol only achieves its goals when the attacker does not control any of the inputs to aggregation.

I think you're right that it's different, mainly due to the word "most". I've clarified.
